ft_irc
Internet Relay Chat

Summary: This project is about creating your own IRC server.
You will use an actual IRC client to connect to your server and test it.
The Internet is governed by solid standard protocols that allow connected computers to
interact with each other.
It’s always beneficial to understand these protocols.
Version: 10.0

Contents
I

Introduction

2

II

General rules

3

III

AI Instructions

4

IV

Mandatory Part
IV.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.2
For MacOS only . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV.3
Test example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6
8
9
9

V

Readme Requirements

10

VI

Bonus part

11

VII

Submission and peer-evaluation

12

1

Chapter I
Introduction
Internet Relay Chat or IRC is a text-based communication protocol on the Internet.
It offers real-time messaging that can be either public or private. Users can exchange
direct messages and join group channels.
IRC clients connect to IRC servers in order to join channels. IRC servers are connected
together to form a network.

2

Chapter II
General rules
• Your program should not crash in any circumstances (even when it runs out of
memory), and should not quit unexpectedly.
If it happens, your project will be considered non-functional and your grade will be
0.
• You have to turn in a Makefile which will compile your source files. It must not
perform unnecessary relinking.
• Your Makefile must at least contain the rules:
$(NAME), all, clean, fclean and re.
• Compile your code with c++ using the flags -Wall -Wextra -Werror.
• Your code must comply with the C++ 98 standard. Then, it should still compile
if you add the flag -std=c++98.
• Try to always code using C++ features when available (for example, choose <cstring>
over <string.h>). You are allowed to use C functions, but always prefer their C++
versions if possible.
• Any external library and Boost libraries are forbidden.

3

Chapter III
AI Instructions
● Context
During your learning journey, AI can assist with many different tasks. Take the time to
explore the various capabilities of AI tools and how they can support your work. However, always approach them with caution and critically assess the results. Whether it’s
code, documentation, ideas, or technical explanations, you can never be completely sure
that your question was well-formed or that the generated content is accurate. Your peers
are a valuable resource to help you avoid mistakes and blind spots.

● Main message
☛ Use AI to reduce repetitive or tedious tasks.
☛ Develop prompting skills — both coding and non-coding — that will benefit your
future career.
☛ Learn how AI systems work to better anticipate and avoid common risks, biases,
and ethical issues.
☛ Continue building both technical and power skills by working with your peers.
☛ Only use AI-generated content that you fully understand and can take responsibility
for.

● Learner rules:
• You should take the time to explore AI tools and understand how they work, so
you can use them ethically and reduce potential biases.
• You should reflect on your problem before prompting — this helps you write clearer,
more detailed, and more relevant prompts using accurate vocabulary.
• You should develop the habit of systematically checking, reviewing, questioning,
and testing anything generated by AI.
• You should always seek peer review — don’t rely solely on your own validation.
4

ft_irc

Internet Relay Chat

● Phase outcomes:
• Develop both general-purpose and domain-specific prompting skills.
• Boost your productivity with effective use of AI tools.
• Continue strengthening computational thinking, problem-solving, adaptability, and
collaboration.

● Comments and examples:
• You’ll regularly encounter situations — exams, evaluations, and more — where
you must demonstrate real understanding. Be prepared, keep building both your
technical and interpersonal skills.
• Explaining your reasoning and debating with peers often reveals gaps in your understanding. Make peer learning a priority.
• AI tools often lack your specific context and tend to provide generic responses. Your
peers, who share your environment, can offer more relevant and accurate insights.
• Where AI tends to generate the most likely answer, your peers can provide alternative perspectives and valuable nuance. Rely on them as a quality checkpoint.
✓ Good practice:
I ask AI: “How do I test a sorting function?” It gives me a few ideas. I try them out
and review the results with a peer. We refine the approach together.
✗ Bad practice:
I ask AI to write a whole function, copy-paste it into my project. During peerevaluation, I can’t explain what it does or why. I lose credibility — and I fail my
project.
✓ Good practice:
I use AI to help design a parser. Then I walk through the logic with a peer. We catch
two bugs and rewrite it together — better, cleaner, and fully understood.
✗ Bad practice:
I let Copilot generate my code for a key part of my project. It compiles, but I can’t
explain how it handles pipes. During the evaluation, I fail to justify and I fail my
project.

5

Chapter IV
Mandatory Part
Program Name
Files to Submit
Makefile
Arguments
External Function

Libft authorized
Description

ircserv
Makefile, *.{h, hpp}, *.cpp, *.tpp, *.ipp,
an optional configuration file
NAME, all, clean, fclean, re
port: The listening port
password: The connection password
Everything in C++ 98.
socket, close, setsockopt, getsockname,
getprotobyname, gethostbyname, getaddrinfo,
freeaddrinfo, bind, connect, listen, accept,
htons, htonl, ntohs, ntohl, inet_addr, inet_ntoa,
inet_ntop, send, recv, signal, sigaction,
sigemptyset, sigfillset, sigaddset, sigdelset,
sigismember, lseek, fstat, fcntl, poll (or
equivalent)
n/a
An IRC server in C++ 98

You are required to develop an IRC server using the C++ 98 standard.
You must not develop an IRC client.
You must not implement server-to-server communication.
Your executable will be run as follows:
./ircserv <port> <password>
• port: The port number on which your IRC server will be listening for incoming
IRC connections.
• password: The connection password. It will be needed by any IRC client that tries
to connect to your server.

6

ft_irc

Internet Relay Chat

Even though poll() is mentioned in the subject and the evaluation
scale, you may use any equivalent such as select(), kqueue(), or
epoll().

7

ft_irc

IV.1

Internet Relay Chat

Requirements

• The server must be capable of handling multiple clients simultaneously without
hanging.
• Forking is prohibited. All I/O operations must be non-blocking.
• Only 1 poll() (or equivalent) can be used for handling all these operations (read,
write, but also listen, and so forth).

Because you have to use non-blocking file descriptors, it is
possible to use read/recv or write/send functions with no poll()
(or equivalent), and your server wouldn’t be blocking.
However, it would consume more system resources.
Therefore, if you attempt to read/recv or write/send in any file
descriptor without using poll() (or equivalent), your grade will be
0.

• Several IRC clients exist. You have to choose one of them as a reference. Your
reference client will be used during the evaluation process.
• Your reference client must be able to connect to your server without encountering
any error.
• Communication between client and server has to be done via TCP/IP (v4 or v6).
• Using your reference client with your server must be similar to using it with any
official IRC server. However, you only have to implement the following features:
◦ You must be able to authenticate, set a nickname, a username, join a channel,
send and receive private messages using your reference client.
◦ All the messages sent from one client to a channel have to be forwarded to
every other client that joined the channel.
◦ You must have operators and regular users.
◦ Then, you have to implement the commands that are specific to channel
operators:
∗ KICK - Eject a client from the channel
∗ INVITE - Invite a client to a channel
∗ TOPIC - Change or view the channel topic
∗ MODE - Change the channel’s mode:
· i: Set/remove Invite-only channel
· t: Set/remove the restrictions of the TOPIC command to channel
operators
· k: Set/remove the channel key (password)
8

ft_irc

Internet Relay Chat
· o: Give/take channel operator privilege
· l: Set/remove the user limit to channel

• Of course, you are expected to write a clean code.

IV.2

For MacOS only
Since MacOS does not implement write() in the same way as other Unix
OSes, you are permitted to use fcntl().
You must use file descriptors in non-blocking mode in order to get a
behavior similar to the one of other Unix OSes.

However, you are allowed to use fcntl() only as follows:
fcntl(fd, F_SETFL, O_NONBLOCK);
Any other flag is forbidden.

IV.3

Test example

Verify every possible error and issue, such as receiving partial data, low bandwidth, etc.
To ensure that your server correctly processes all data sent to it, the following simple
test using nc can be performed:
\$> nc -C 127.0.0.1 6667
com^Dman^Dd
\$>

Use ctrl+D to send the command in several parts: ’com’, then ’man’, then ’d\n’.
In order to process a command, you have to first aggregate the received packets in
order to rebuild it.

9

Chapter V
Readme Requirements
A README.md file must be provided at the root of your Git repository. Its purpose is
to allow anyone unfamiliar with the project (peers, staff, recruiters, etc.) to quickly
understand what the project is about, how to run it, and where to find more information
on the topic.
The README.md must include at least:
• The very first line must be italicized and read: This project has been created as part
of the 42 curriculum by <login1>[, <login2>[, <login3>[...]]].
• A “Description” section that clearly presents the project, including its goal and a
brief overview.
• An “Instructions” section containing any relevant information about compilation,
installation, and/or execution.
• A “Resources” section listing classic references related to the topic (documentation, articles, tutorials, etc.), as well as a description of how AI was used —
specifying for which tasks and which parts of the project.
➠ Additional sections may be required depending on the project (e.g., usage
examples, feature list, technical choices, etc.).
Any required additions will be explicitly listed below.

Your README must be written in English.

10

Chapter VI
Bonus part
Here are additional features you may add to your IRC server to make it resemble an
actual IRC server more closely:
• Handle file transfer.
• A bot.

The bonus part will only be assessed if the mandatory part is
PERFECT. Perfect means the mandatory part has been integrally done
and works without malfunctioning. If you have not passed ALL the
mandatory requirements, your bonus part will not be evaluated at all.

11

Chapter VII
Submission and peer-evaluation
Submit your assignment to your Git repository as usual. Only the work inside your
repository will be evaluated during the defense. Do not hesitate to double-check the
names of your files to ensure they are correct.
You are encouraged to create test programs for your project even though they will
not be submitted or graded. Those tests could be especially useful to test your server
during defense, but also your peer’s if you have to evaluate another ft_irc one day.
Indeed, you are free to use whatever tests you need during the evaluation process.

Your reference client will be used during the evaluation process.

During the evaluation, a brief modification of the project may occasionally be requested. This could involve a minor behavior change, a few lines of code to write or
rewrite, or an easy-to-add feature.
While this step may not be applicable to every project, you must be prepared for it
if it is mentioned in the evaluation guidelines.
This step is meant to verify your actual understanding of a specific part of the project.
The modification can be performed in any development environment you choose (e.g.,
your usual setup), and it should be feasible within a few minutes — unless a specific
timeframe is defined as part of the evaluation.
You can, for example, be asked to make a small update to a function or script, modify a
display, or adjust a data structure to store new information, etc.
The details (scope, target, etc.) will be specified in the evaluation guidelines and may
vary from one evaluation to another for the same project.

12

